[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news. [music]
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Jill
Weisenthal [music]
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, I've I've always had this idea
for the podcast or a thing that I've
wanted to do.
>> Okay. conceptually with podcasts is
schedule every guest for two interviews.
So you have the opening interview and
you ask a bunch of questions and then
it's oh god I really wish I had followed
up on that. I had more I was just
starting to sort of get my head around
this thing. Now I could have asked the
good questions and then like have the
person come back next week. Also the the
audience complains. I wish you would
asked that and then fill in all those
gaps that had been inspired by the
previous conversation.
>> I don't think it's a bad idea. I think
it would double the number of episodes
that we put out. But sure, there are
topics that come up, usually things that
we're just kind of new to and we're
trying to learn about specifically
technical things and one of those has to
be AI, right?
>> AI and also, you know, I really had a
great time. I guess last month we were
in Chicago. We talked to a bunch of
different, it was like a trading related
trip. We uh interviewed Don Wilson. We
interviewed the head of the CME. We had
some other chats and they're all about
the world of trading. When it comes to
trading, it's like, you know, we talked
to long-term investors, portfolio
managers, endowments. [clears throat] We
talked to some people in the hedge fund
space who like maybe have a holding
period of several weeks or whatever. I
actually really want to learn more about
the trading like these people who have
like a holding time of 1 second or
something like that because that's where
a lot of the tech and a lot of the
actual like action is and how that world
makes money and how they actually deploy
technology is very interesting but still
something I don't have my handle on.
Well, the practical application, right?
And also the culture of AI on Wall
Street. I find that really interesting
because I remember I guess it was like
more than a decade ago. But remember
Lloyd Blankfine saying that Goldman
Sachs is a technology company.
[laughter]
>> Yeah. And all these bank CEOs saying
we're going to install ping pong tables
to get all the coders. And now I see ads
at trading firms and it's like we have a
data center full of B200s or we have a
data center full of G300s. Come work for
us. The only thing besides all their
tech that I know is like every time you
read a profile of any trading company,
they're like and they love to play back
gammon there. They love to play like all
the article the chess boards are out and
they could be seen playing chess over
lunch etc. I get it. Okay, they like
odds, they like games, they like
whatever. Let's move the ball forward.
>> Well, there's also the underlying theme
of is this all hype? Right. Because you
do get the sense sometimes that
companies are putting out press releases
where they just mention AI to tick a box
to be seen to be doing something and
hope that their stock actually goes up.
And because so much of this is
proprietary and people kind of have an
excuse not to go into detail about it,
>> sometimes you do get the feeling that
people are just talking about it and not
actually using it.
>> Cynics, and I'm not saying this myself.
>> I know you're not a cynic. Speaking of
trading and technology, Cynics
would say that CME's deal with Google to
build a cloud to you put trading on the
cloud was hyped. That was a press
release. People have said that people
have made that charge and they don't
understand why. You don't have to
comment. You don't have to say anything
further on that.
>> I do have a comment, but I'll hold it
for our guest.
>> I'm just saying there is this world
where people do press releases and
cynics go, I don't really understand the
point. Anyway, there's a very long wind
up. Let's learn more about the world of
trading. Let's learn more about AI and
tech specifically. What does it even
mean to apply AI within the realm of
trading? We are going to be speaking
with Ian Dunning. He is the head of AI
at Hudson River Trading. He was
previously at Deep Mind. So, his uh
trading and AI bonafides are about as
good as it gets with
>> you've established them.
>> We've established that really the
perfect guest to answer all our
questions. So, Ian, thank you so much
for uh coming on the podcast.
>> Yeah, I'm really happy to be here. I I I
agree is the mystic the mystique factor
is kind of overblown even if it's
understandable why people embrace it
sometimes.
>> We're going to blow past the mystique.
Let's start with some like really just
like rudimentary questions. Just the
first one is like Hudson River Trading
as a company.
>> Yeah.
>> How does it make money?
>> Yeah. So we are a sort of quantitative
>> Yeah.
>> automated proprietary trading firm which
is a lot of words but I guess the way I
see it is we are a service provider to
markets.
>> Okay. The most clear example is market
making. There is like a sort of utility
to the world of being ready to buy or
sell any product anytime anywhere. And
for us that means stocks, futures,
options, crypto, bonds. And if you could
say build a magical machine to quote a
price to buy or sell at any instrument
and you would want to be like the best
possible price, like the tightest price,
people would trade with you.
>> Yeah. they would be happy because
there's a counterparty for their trade
and they get a kind of good price like a
low spread and we're happy because we
essentially pick up a penny in front of
a steamroller. Like we are making sort
of money from that spread and we can
pick up the pennies in front of a
steamroller if we have a really magical
device which tells us how everything
should be worth the steamroller is
coming.
>> Yeah, it tells us when the steamroller
is coming. And so I I think that's kind
of the very very sophisticated sort of
middleman in some sense in the same way
that Amazon is. Amazon doesn't make
stuff but is a very valuable profitable
company. Provides a service people get
value of. Same thing. We're moving stock
spawns through time and space between
different counterparties. And yeah,
>> we will ask you about the steamroller in
a few minutes. But before we do that,
how does AI or the way you're using AI
actually differ from the algorithmic or
quant trading of old? Because I guess
that one of the questions is is this,
you know, a sort of evolutionary change,
you know, maybe a marginal improvement
on what already exists or is this
something seismic and a step change the
big shift in the way trading actually
works.
>> Yeah, I mean I don't want to over
overstate ourselves in some sense
because in the space as you mentioned
before it's very like opaque what sort
of different firms of this class are
doing. I can certainly speak to our own
experience which is we've been doing
this type of trading for 20 plus years
and much like everyone who was doing
this the way it kind of worked was you
handcraft features that sort of based on
human intuition oh I don't know the
order book looks imbalanced there's more
people wanting to buy than sell the
price is going to go up soon or
something like that and maybe you you
get a bunch of very smart people and
they think very hard like it's almost
like making a very fancy watch you kind
of artistically craft all these pieces
and then maybe you use relatively simple
meth mathematical techniques like linear
regression to combine those predictors
and I've been going to conferences and
things and recruiting for a long time
and even if today just go on the
internet you'll people say things like
oh that's all you can do in finance for
some reason they'll say this they'll say
something like oh it's too noisy or
markets are too non-stationary or things
like this and so that's all you can do
and I guess that belief isn't really
backed up by anything in my my opinion
and like lived experience I guess and so
we sort of viewed it horror for a long
time is well basing in the world and
ideally you would put this into kind of
like a machine that does not have any
human biases. I don't know how to trade
stocks myself like I I buy broad market
ETFs. What do I know? And so we but if
you could put all the m data into a box
and it kind of could turn all that data
it would find things that you would
never be able to do this handcrafted
thing. And we started doing that very
early relatively in 2014 2013 period.
And over time over the last sort of
decade or so much like in other contexts
that are not finance there has been sort
of a hockey stick and you can measure it
by the size of the models the compute
deployed. And over time that way of
modeling the markets initially was not
like a hybrid with the traditional way
kind of just like overtook it entirely.
And so now our trading is entirely
driven by this magical machine that
consumes all our data. I kind of keep
saying this magical machine that
consumes our data for a reason which is
that this is how chat GPT is trained. It
consumes all the data all the internet.
It's kind of scraped and connected into
one place. You train a model that kind
of takes it all and something emergent
comes from it. And that's why I'm kind
of
>> a bit leading but that's why I'm talking
about in the sense and I think that is
materially different from the like I'm
using my intuition of the markets to
kind of construct a predictive model.
>> So just to be clear how much of the
usefulness of AI here is about execution
and the fact that you can crunch a lot
of data really quickly with hundreds or
thousands of GPUs versus spotting
sophisticated patterns or discrepancies
that you can exploit.
>> I think it's both. I think one of the
things that people sort of missed with
the whole like do a linear regression
type thing is when you really think
about how much data there is in
financial markets generated and when I
say data I think it's important to think
of it as every event that happens in
markets not the sort of time series of
prices but like the actual low-level
substrate people are quoting trading
retracting quotes that like low-level
stuff is internet scale data set sizes
and one of our sort of bitter lessony
type things of AI was like You shouldn't
think too hard about how to feature
engineer this and pre-process it. You
should kind of throw it all in just
something a form of computation that can
kind of make use of internet scale data.
In the 2010s, it was like computer
vision. People used to make detectors
for edges of images and things and they
would combine them. And same thing, it's
like that was a good approach, but you
know, it's completely dominated by the
idea of getting a very large number of
GPUs and a kind of a pretty generic
neural network form and powering through
it. As for like the how is it finding
things that other methods could not,
it's very hard to say. Our models are
not very interpretable. And I think
that's fine because as Joe mentioned,
our sort of trading style and holding
times are better thought of as like
minutes, hours, maybe like a low single
digit days for the most part. And I
guess in my mind it's unreasonable to
expect them to be interpretable because
I I don't know if I looked at the
orderbook data for Tesla or something.
Am I really going to be able to tell you
better than random what the price of
Tesla will be in a minute's time? And so
I kind of think it like that. If you
have something that's clearly superhuman
already,
>> what level of interpretability could you
expect? Like that's very different,
right, to normal AI, right? This is gets
into some areas that I'm very
interested, but just to like establish
what we're talking about. Yeah. You're
trading a stock like a Tesla, Nvidia,
etc.
>> With your magic machine,
>> magic machine.
>> Now, we had another episode where we
Well, that was the money box
>> as a magic box.
>> That's a different
>> That's a different one with this AI
machine that is sort of arguably grown,
right? It's sort of grown in a lab more
than it is programmed. Much like a
chatbot. I know it's a very different
technology. like what is the price of
Nvidia going to be tomorrow or what is
the price of Nvidia going to be this
afternoon? What you're saying is with
your technology you have a better a
better chance of getting that right that
you actually might be able to make an
informed prediction about the future in
a way that you couldn't have done say 10
years ago.
>> Yes.
>> And that people who talked about this
they would come up with reasons oh the
stock market it's not like chess or go
and therefore you can't really do
predictions the same way. But what
you're saying is that with these models
which are different than LLMs, there is
some at least on a short time scale
predictive capacity.
>> Yes. I think I find this still to this
day a little bit hard to believe. I
think you get this kind of efficient
market hypothesis stuff jumped into your
head. It seems like someone's saying
they can predict like the price of a
stock in an hour. Your instinctual
reaction is incredulously like just
sounds like you're kind of bluffing or
making it up and but no, these models
can predict this. I think it's the way
to kind of reconcile the like really man
like kind of instinct is that the
predictions are very bad in some sense.
We don't normally talk about like
accuracy, but I think the way to think
about it is like the accuracy is like
50.1% type thing. Like they're only a
little bit better than random.
>> But I suppose an extra 1% like blows up
your profits if if you're doing it at
scale.
>> Doing doing it at scale doing it enough
times and over time you kind of realize
the biased coin flip. And as for why it
might be possible to do this without
kind of invoking magic, it's like
>> markets are very beautiful interaction
of like many different parties, all the
different kind of utilities, risk
preferences and things
>> and the only way you really see what
people are doing is by like the actions
they take in markets and you kind of
>> it's sucking up all that like signal
micro signal and extrapolating.
>> The cynicism or the skepticism about the
possibility of machines that could
predict the price of stocks is a little
strange, right? Because machines ingest
data then whatever maybe they see a
pattern more likely than not this
constellation of data means tomorrow
will be green. Humans do this all the
time. What else do we have besides data?
Right? You have an analyst and they put
out a Tesla or whatever Nvidia is going
to go to $500 a share.
>> How dare you insinuate I'm not smarter
than a computer.
>> We we're like all humans have this data
and much less data and yet humans are
making predictions all the time. There's
a whole industry of it. So the idea that
therefore a was for some reason a
computer couldn't do this with much more
data than analysts ever have this I
understand why the cynicism is comes off
as a little strange.
>> I think some of the doubt stems from
this idea that a lot of these models
tend to be backward-looking right and
some of them occasionally are pretty bad
at spotting or reacting to big regime
breaks. And I guess the thinking again
sometimes is that maybe humans are more
flexible, maybe more adaptive in their
thinking and they can kind of spot these
big cultural shifts. How do you actually
I guess prepare for those big pattern
changes?
>> Yeah, I was at HIT for CO and I thought
that was kind of like the most
>> that was a big pattern.
>> That was a big pattern break and things
went totally fine. Actually, it was more
of an engineering crisis in some ways.
stock market volumes exploded and every
system was just like screaming trying to
keep up with the volume of activity. But
in terms of the predictions, they stayed
quite good and I had to like reconcile
this in my head as well. I guess this it
is a matter of like horizon and like how
far in the future are we talking
intraday I think a lot of the price
movement is driven by just observing
like the flows. It's hard for us as
humans to observe, but it's like the
relative patterns of buyers and sellers
in the markets and it's like yes during
COVID the volatility was massive and
prices were moving up and down a lot but
they were going up and down
>> during say March 2020 and so these
models it was sort of out of domain for
a human but I don't think in out of
domain in some sense for the models
>> but I guess I also don't know how you
would apply this thinking if you were
trying to make sort of month ahead
predictions. I often get like people
being like, "Oh, everyone knows hedge
funds, which we're not a hedge fund, is
like a they're like flipping coins and
it's some survivor bias thing." And you
know, I genuinely don't know about
months out prediction stuff. That is not
a data rich environment.
>> I mean, just by definition, there have
been more days than months, right? And
so therefore, prediction on a day basis,
you're offered a lot more data. Is that
what you're saying?
>> That rule of thumb is basically very
useful. It is a and it extends all the
way down to seconds.
>> Yeah. And we see that empirically all
the time. And so yeah, I guess all the
things I'm saying do have this caveat
that it does rely on being a certain
level of signal to noise. I definitely
cannot make reasonable claims about the
price of things in like a month using
the same kind of like AI hammer. I guess
also to be specific, I'm talking a lot
about using market data to make these
predictions. And that's because on the
sort of intraday time scale, that is the
most important thing. It's all about
flows and things back and forth. If
you're thinking about things in a
month's time scale, I think that's
fundamentals. And can AI be used for
that? I don't know to be honest. And
it's definitely outside my wheelhouse.
And I guess people have various opinions
about that. And maybe some people very
much would like to claim that they can.
And you know, others maybe don't, but
it's definitely outside of my area of
expertise. And I I don't know. Wait,
talk to us about the data that you're
using or talk more because this is
another area where people tend to talk
in PR speak. Sometimes we
[clears throat] have access to all this
data, unusual data, alternative data,
and that's going to enable us to use AI
better. What are you actually looking
at? And what have you found, I guess,
most useful? Well, I think the thing
that I found most counterintuitive when
I started was that when you're thinking
about predicting the prices of anything
a minute, an hour out, by far the most
useful thing is just market data. This
is the market data feeds you can buy
from the exchanges for a pretty
reasonable price. People often think
this is some sort of like competitive
moat. the data fees for these exchanges
are not particularly high and in crypto
you know where it's like a wild west but
everyone can collect these feeds and so
that is the most useful raw ingredient
that is the most true expression of
everyone's intents right they're going
to the market they're quoting the buying
selling that is the primary ingredient
people get kind of caught up on the
whole like oh no do you have a Twitter
feed type of thing and Bloomberg sells a
Twitter feed through a state of products
and
>> buy that
>> buy that so it's every now and then
obviously something happens news happens
during market hours that moves the price
dislocates the price. But if you really
coldly rationalize that, that is a
relatively infrequent thing compared to
the overall massive markets. So for
thinking intraday, think these market
data feeds. It's literally like a little
events someone quoted at this price and
this size. It's all anonymous. Market
data feeds are anonymous. And so that is
the raw stuff and it is vast. There are
just millions and millions of events per
day per stock per future. When you get
to the day days time scale, that's where
the alternative data quote unquote kind
of really comes in. As in alternative to
market data, the SEC filings, the news
feeds, balance sheets, broker reports,
things like this. That's where that
comes in. And there's a vast sea of data
offerings that people try and sell that
I think in that kind of situation, you
it's a very low sharp environment you
start getting into. And it's it can be
hard to attribute the extra sharp each
of these things. But in some sense, it's
also very democratized. There are maybe
people collecting very secret data sets,
but my inbox, and I'm not even the
person in charge of buying these
alternative data sets, is often full of
people trying to sell me the latest
alternative data set. And I think a lot
of them don't necessarily have much
predictive value,
>> but clearly there's there's a market for
it.
>> What's the craziest one you've seen?
>> Huh?
>> Can you remember? I mean, people have
definitely reacted very strongly to the
Wall Street Bets era and tried to kind
of bunch of Reddity extracted thing and
go beyond just like raw captures of
Reddit and trying to distill it into
something.
>> But, you know, I just even just thinking
about it, the meme stock thing is kind
of almost talked about more after it
happens than it happens before. [music]
And so, like I I don't know.
>> [music]
[music]
>> This sort of a sideways question. You
mentioned interpretability and this got
me something I've been wondering about
AI for a while. Not even in the finance
realm specifically. You're a deep mind
which of course produced a great go
player better than the greatest
grandmaster in the world. I played
chess. We know that chess engines are
much better than any human. On the other
hand,
>> as far as I could tell, there is no good
AI chess tutor. So, in other words, the
chess crush, but like I've never been
able to like get a thing where it's
okay, you did this move, but you know
what, you're closing this rook file and
down the line because his like it
doesn't do that. The chess.com
human talk is very rudimentary, etc. Can
you talk a little bit about why there
are these problems where some version of
AI or machine learning or whatever can
do fantastically well, but then the
actual explanation of what it's doing,
which I think is kind of what
interpretability is, can't articulate in
a plain English why it's able to do what
it does. I think it's just because these
neuronet networks are some sense just
like a big old blob of numbers and what
we're aiming to do when we're training
these models is to almost like free
ourselves from almost all structure and
they might learn things in a way that is
nothing at all like how we learn things.
And so my my my best guess for like why
it's hard is because they might be
reasoning in some sense internally. And
people use these words like reasoning.
It kind of makes me wse. I've seen
imagination and things used about neural
networks. My god, I don't know. It's
like kind of anthropomorphization of
them is kind of dangerous because they
are essentially processing things
internally in this way that I think is
inherently
>> not like how we do and that is my best
sort of guess. There are some
interesting counter examples. One of my
favorite sort of things in the past
couple years was Golden Gate Claude
which was anthropic made the model
basically get very interested in the
Golden Gate Bridge and every question
they asked would come back to the Golden
Gate Bridge. And so they're not
completely impenetrable.
>> Yeah.
>> But it's clear that like it gets hard
beyond a point to kind of map this back
to how anyway like we think and it's
it's very tempting to and exciting to
and especially for like AI safety
applications which aren't really
relevant to me so much but I think it's
very tempting to try.
>> Yeah.
>> No, it strikes me is that if you could
solve that many jobs would you could
actually make a lot of productivity
gains. But I do think that's an
important hurdle when you're training
your models. So your models are
different than large language models
etc. But what they have in common is
this incredible amount of data,
incredible amount of compute demand. How
applicable if someone had worked on LLMs
would your training process be to them?
How interpret how could they move from
that environment to yours? Are there
enough similarities in the basic notions
and compute and requirements to train a
model such as yours versus what people
are doing at the major labs?
>> I would say now in 2025 absolutely.
>> Okay. But I would not have said that in
2020. And this is something that kind of
just caught me by surprise having done
this for a while now is that our
problems are kind of defined by long
sequential strings of information in
some sense and extrapolating from that.
If I think back to the past of AI, it
was like is this a is this is this like
a hot dog or not? It's kind of like the
like image classifier, you know, test.
>> Then uh there was some stuff with audio
and things that was a little bit more
familiar. robotics. Eh, but when we got
to this sort of LLM era, it got very
interesting because suddenly the
problems were very similar in that you
have you want to think back over like
long histories, long context. Okay, that
sounds good. You've got a lot of data
and you want to turn through it in as
efficient way as possible. You also have
to serve this model. This model has to
run in like a relatively reasonable
speed. uh especially for the LM places
there are a million people typing into
chatgbt.com and they want to hear a
response in a relatively prompt manner
of course for us also the models have to
make their predictions in a prompt
manner of ways the predictions aren't
useful so all these things mean that our
sort of way of thinking about it has
become very similar to the frontier LLM
things it's just a very different
modality we're operating on I guess
primarily text and we're operating on
this fileless interpretable but still a
sequential
stream of tokens
except our tokens are market events. And
so it's a lot of fun because you know in
terms of like the research that is still
published you can kind of look at it for
inspiration and draw comparisons but
it's also it's very much its own problem
which is kind of keeps me interested
every day because it's like its own
unique thing but it's different. I want
to go back to the point you made about
data and I guess democratizing finance
in many ways and maybe this is a weird
question but I'm thinking back to the
2010s and we used to talk about the big
investment banks as flow monsters. They
see all these orders. They get all these
orders. They see all the flow and that
allows them to optimize on funding costs
and other expenses. is the idea that
data and AI can kind of replicate that
advantage so that everyone or not
everyone but Hudson at least becomes its
own little flow monster. Yeah, I think
there's still some trends and markets
that worry me a little bit in terms of I
guess our platonic ideal market
structure is probably like everyone
trades on exchange in a centralized
place, but that is not really how things
seem to be going and there's a huge
amount of like off exchange
dark quasi dark volume and I think
there's still a lot of corners of the
trading world where like being in the
room is kind of like this big advantage
and this is a very much anti-AII play in
some sense. data is hidden. The data the
flow data is hidden and it's not
something that you can feed into a
machine because there's very sparse
amounts of it. And so that's kind of a
an interesting trend. A lot of this data
gets reported in a centralized place
later, but it's not prompt enough to be
useful. And so to extend that AI thrives
on data, this is in some sense like an
issue for the long run, you need to kind
of be in the rooms where the sort of
trading is happening. I'm glad you
brought that up because that's
specifically what I'm curious about from
the sort of physical infrastructure
side. Like if I have a query at a chat
GPT,
>> I don't care if the model is like
trained in like Ebene, Texas or yeah,
wherever it gets back to me, I don't
whatever. But I know that for high
frequency trading at least on the
execution side there are certain parts
that you want to be literally
coll-located and you want to have the
shortest possible wire and however short
it is ideally you'd like it to be
shorter. Can you talk about the
differences and similarities between
essentially your physical hardware stack
versus what would be required at a large
language model frontier lab.
>> Yeah like that. I think at a bulk level
there's actually some pretty similar
things. So there's often think about it
as like latency and throughput. Latency
being the time to react and then
throughput kind of like how much
thinking you can do in a certain period
of time.
>> And so you're right that like this space
demands like low latency.
>> Early in the 2010s it was a sort of
flash boys book and perception where it
was like really kind of about
arbitrageing latency. I'm happy to
report that in some sense all the
latency has been arbitrageed for the
most part. [laughter] There's no more
edge in shortening the wire.
>> There's there's probably like a little
bit, but it's it's relatively small. And
like I think if you look at the big
quant trading firms, the the need to
like really make the wires as short as
they possibly can is done or no longer
relevant, which is great cuz I find that
stuff pretty boring. Personally, I think
about it more as like for a given kind
of like speed of response, you should be
the smartest person. So there's like
this curve. If you're going to take a
second to come up with your trading
decision, better be a really really good
decision. And then it doesn't kind of
matter that it took a second. And if
you're going to take a microscond, well,
a you probably can't do too much in a
microcond, but you know, it better still
be the best response in a microcond. And
so,
>> but you could be a little worse.
>> You could be a little worse.
>> And then the second the second for sure.
And so essentially for our training, we
use the cloud. We have our own training
data centers that we've built ourselves.
That is basically the same although much
much smaller scale. the scale of Googles
and things. I don't know. It blows my
mind for spending on on on stuff like
this. We are I think big if you're not
comparing us to Google or Meta, but not
that's not like bajillions of dollars.
So training is is kind of the same
inference. You we need to put the
devices close to the exchanges
>> and we need to think very hard about the
power usage and the latency, but we have
hardware teams. We make our own FPGAAS.
We make our own chips and we use
off-the-shelf GPUs. And what we try and
do is we try and make sure that for any
given sort of speed of response, we're
making the smallest possible decision we
can. So you can kind of
>> field programmable gate array.
>> Oh, there you go. Sorry. FPGA.
>> FPGA. Yeah. Basically, all these
different devices have different
latencies and throughputs. GPUs have
very high throughput. They are that's
what they're useful for, right? And so,
but the problem with markets is they're
kind of like narrow. The amount of
traffic flowing into these like LLMs
from everyone typing into their web
browsers is just massive. and they do
all sorts of clever things to kind of
batch up requests and process and
things. We don't really have that luxury
really like the markets are going to
happen at the speed they happen. We
can't kind of like duck out for a while
and catch up. We kind of need to stay in
the game. So, we have all these sort of
interesting design challenges around how
do we use GPUs which are relatively high
latency. They take a while to get back a
result, but they can process the whole
stock market on one GPU type of thing
versus the fast response. And so, we
have whole teams dedicated to thinking
about, okay, I've got this like
intelligent blob. How do I get answers
out of it in different ways at different
speeds? And that I think is where a lot
of us smarts are going in this world
these days rather than the like how do I
make sure my microwave towers are like
slightly better aligned somewhere in
like rural Pennsylvania like which is a
cool challenge in its own right but it's
done. I think I think people have found
the straightest line from New Jersey to
Chicago.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Joe brought up some of the cynicism
around CME's cloud deal with Google and
this came up speaking of a specific
cynic who went on the record in one of
our episodes. Don Wilson basically made
the argument that matching on a cloud
doesn't necessarily make sense because
you might put in two orders and you're
not really sure which order gets filled
first. I guess you're kind of back in
that blackbox environment or maybe it's
a latency issue. I don't know. Is that a
problem that you're seeing?
>> It's something that I I worry about. Our
general philosophy is market should be
very like transparent and as fair as
possible. So like equalizing access is a
good thing in terms of participants
shouldn't be able to like basically pull
weird tricks to be faster. On the other
hand, I think you want reliability. So
like this concept of like orders
arriving at different times and being
filled in different orders just doesn't
seem like a very sensible way to run a
market. It's something that requires a
lot of effort to engineer around and
it's just a good market design to have.
It is a very widespread though in
existing exchanges across the world. We
trade in like a vast number of countries
and some of the exchanges have such
amazing hardware that like if two orders
are sent within like a nancond of each
other, this exchange will never process
them in the wrong order. Even if there's
a 100 different network ports and
they're all connected, they have this
amazing timestamping stuff. On the other
hand, you might have like a crypto
exchange where it kind of feels like a
kid learned JavaScript and and ran set
up a website and you're kind of like you
send an order and you may or may not be
confirmed that they even received it and
then you kind of have to refresh your
like account balance page like 5 minutes
later to see if there's money in it or
not. And we kind of we'll take we'll
deal with it as it is. But certainly we
have a preference for kind of equalized
access but sort of predictable outcomes.
And I think that kind of leads to like
people spending effort. I think it's not
a necessarily a very great thing for
society for people to be like stressing
very hard about YLM.
>> Yeah. No, probably. I'm glad I'm glad
that you report that we've uh moved on a
little bit since then. Where are your
constraints? You know, when you talk to
LLM people, there's debates about right
is it electricity? Is that the big
constraint? Is it there just aren't
enough GPUs? Is it talent? Is it
whatever? when you think about where you
are now versus the optimal version of
where or is it I mean data is the other
big one because there's all this concern
that LLMs are going to run out of
training data etc where is the big
constraint for you that you feel like
you're solving for right now
>> I think in terms of like really the
long-term strategic planning electricity
is like quite clearly a very binding
consideration when we think about
spinning up new like GPU based training
data centers
>> it really feels like is there
electricity like finding pie piece of
land to put a building in. There's a lot
of land.
>> Yeah.
>> The electricity negotiations
>> and that's an issue at HRT that thinking
about
>> even for us, you know, because we have a
sort of hybrid mix of using cloud
providers and building our own data
centers and yeah, the negotiations and
thinking about power constraints. We
have an existing data center in a very
cold place and we want to make it bigger
and the data center people are fantastic
to work with but they're saying like
well we need to go talk to like the
power grid and negotiate this next
trunch and so on and it's just it often
feels like that is the bottleneck and on
the terms of a GPU availability it
definitely was a crunch uh at some point
in the past but I don't feel like that
is
>> can you say a little bit more the entire
stock market is riding on say a little
bit more about how you perceive the GPU
I think I think if we ask for GPUs we
will get them delivered in a prompt
manner not necessarily like next day but
I don't feel like that is the thing that
we have a long pole and spinning up more
>> when was the when was the worst of the
crunch
>> I guess 2023 late 2023 felt pretty bad I
was I guess that was like the Nvidia
hopper generation and I saw some number
in Bloomberg yesterday that I think it
was like Nvidia conference yesterday and
they said something like it was like 1
million hopper class GPUs have been
made, but already like 4 million
Blackwell class GPUs have been made. So,
I think there's been a ramp up of
supply, but I don't think they're also
sitting on unsold inventory either. I
think it is being consumed, but yeah, in
terms of like what is the hard thing? I
think electricity and I'm it's insane. I
as a very millennial person, I guess
climate change was a big thing growing
up in college. a lot of discussion about
climate change. And to see people
spinning up data centers very fast by
basically buying as many gas turbines as
they can and putting them outside. I'm
like,
>> whoa. Like what are we doing? It's wild.
But that's like the only way to get
electricity promptly. You just have to
throw gas turbines outside the building
and turn them on. I It's pretty radical
stuff. And I don't know how all the
numbers that people are talking about
for future data center expansion kind of
math out because you just back of the
envelope that power usage and things and
I I know that the Sam Almans of the
world have thought about this talked
about this. Oh, we need to be generating
this much new power generation per unit
time but there there's such daunting
numbers. I just don't know how that is
all going to work out. But yeah, even
for us in the grand scheme of things
like a much smaller player in terms of
power consumption. We think in terms of
like tens of megawatts and not gigawatts
which is more in most towns and cities
and things but still
>> and but we find it like a challenge to
find electricity at a reasonable price.
Wait, on this note, can you talk to us a
little bit more about where competitive
advantage actually comes from in this
space? Because if the GPU crunch is
somewhat solved and if latency isn't as
big an issue as it used to be, where are
people actually getting their edge from?
>> Right. I mean, people talent was one of
your other things as a constraint. Yeah,
it is it is a very competitive people
market. We're essentially asking for
people to know a lot of things, be both
good researchers and good engineers
because I don't know in this AI era of a
distinction is pretty blurry. It's not
something you can just whiteboard and
then the coding is a little bit
afterwards. Any kind of research idea
you have is intimately connected to how
you implement it. So that's already like
a tough ask. So people are constrained
people that we like I want to find and
we pay well for those people as a result
and it is competitive. But I think the
more subtle edge is almost like putting
[snorts] it all together. Do you have
people who can like an engineering team
that can collect all the data, record
it, make it available to the GPU
training data center? This is like many
I guess it's pabyte scale data set of
sets and just storing that much data
streaming it from wherever it's stored
to wherever in the world the training
data center is reliably. These training
runs are very expensive. And then once
you've got that model serving it, so it
kind of sounds do everything. And maybe
that's kind of like a lame answer, but
it really is. It's I think you need to
be just optimizing the whole stack. And
so like my team is like the AI team. And
so and that what that really means in
practice is we're focused on training
the models which is an important but not
sufficient part of a whole stack because
we would be kind of dead in the water
without the teams at HRT who who think
about how to like actually kind of get
the data and and things to these systems
and then the decisions out to the
markets and keep up when things get busy
all these things. So when I think about
our competitors I think there is a
benefit to to scale. I can't imagine how
you would start a new company like HRT
in the year 2025 because of the huge
initial lift to kind of build enough
engineering scale to to achieve this
sort of thing. And so I think our sort
of peer companies also have invested
very heavily in engineering and will
continue to do so. And there was an
article in the FT like a little like a
week or two ago about how firms like HIT
are kind of extending themselves more
into slower trading and there are firms
that are kind of you know those slower
firms are trying to kind of go faster
and
>> yeah I was just going to ask about just
like on the prediction standpoint. Okay,
maybe you could predict what's with some
reasonable confidence what's going to
happen in the next hour or sometimes if
you're lucky maybe a day. Like maybe a
month is just ridiculous. But do you in
your work is that horizon has it
broadened?
>> It is. Yeah. I think one of the things
for people who are aware of HRT even at
all I think is still a perception. It's
sort of a pre2020 perception of like we
are purely high frequency trading firm.
But we would say we are both high
frequency and medium frequency trading
firm and it's like a big part of our
business. One way to think about it I
think is that by if I really have a view
on what a stock should be in like five
days time. Let's say I want to buy that
stock. I'm going to acquire that stock
overtime and maybe it's what's the best
time to buy that stock over the 5day
period. Well, I have a model that tells
me that the best pricing in an hour. So
maybe the shorter term model should
inform the longer term trade and
cascading all the way down when you're
doing this sort of slightly longer term
or slightly slower frequency trading. Is
the fundamental job still the same which
is you're in the liquidity provision
service business just over longer you
want to hold that warehousing or does it
some because when I think of a fund when
I think of a hedge fund I certainly
don't think of
>> maybe to some extent some of their
strategies might be sort of liquidity
provision but it's more directional is
it still that or is the fundamental
reason why you make money the service
you provide does it change by definition
change over that horizon
>> I think the market making service
provision does break down I think It
stretches the analogy too far. I think
you have to think of it as like
liquidity taking which somehow seems
more like aggressive or something
>> but the we're trading against orders
resting on the books. Someone was like I
want to sell this stock and we're like
we will buy it from you because we think
that in the long run it'll be worth
doing it and so we do cross the spread
and we do pay this transaction cost
sometimes. You know you can also kind of
acquire position by market making but
with a tilt. So really at the longer
horizons I think the sort of
marketmaking service analogy does break
down but in some sense there's always a
counterparty and they wanted to trade
for a reason and I think a mental model
that
>> I don't know you tell me if this sounds
like too too wishy-washy but
>> I love a mental model. Uh you mentioned
go and chess, right? So the thing about
those is that they're they're zero sum
games is only one winner. It's truly
like a no like someone someone's
unhappy, someone wins and maybe equally
unhappy plus one minus one.
>> I think the reason that trading works is
because it is in some sense positive sum
you know money is conserved and I guess
a little fee goes to the exchange. So in
some sense money is at that moment of a
trade is actually negative a little but
utility people's general happiness I
don't know my paycheck goes into my 401k
provider and it buys some ETFs I'm
relatively like insensitive to how
exactly that happens I just I'm not
going to look at it for another 40 years
right um don't lie my I try not to look
at it especially lately but uh yeah like
the utility my utility is a very long
horizon and so if someone sells it to me
like at 1 cent different I don't really
care so but like the person who made the
scents happy and I'm happy because I got
good liquidity, didn't cross a huge
spread. So that is kind of why I think
it it all kind of makes sense and why
people are trading together. But it's
also why like thinking about markets
like an alpha go sense doesn't make
sense because it's kind of doesn't
really apply. If you thought of markets
as HRT and and all our competitors all
kind of in some sort of like death
match, who's the smartest? Who's trying
to pick each other off? Then well
markets would be kind of like this giant
standoff where no one would be trading.
Everyone would be kind of be like
waiting. But obviously markets are very
vibrant. I think it's because even when
we're crossing the spread, it's because
we're crossing the spread against
someone who wanted to sell for whatever
reason. If we were right, I guess in 5
days time they might be like less happy.
But maybe they weren't actually. Maybe
they were just like hedging a position.
They don't care what the stock's price
was in 5 days. They just wanted to like
hedge their position and we traded with
them. So that's the way I tell
reconcilers in my head. It could still
be like a sort of service provision. We
make money only because someone else
wants to trade. If no one was trading,
we wouldn't exist,
>> right? And different market participants
with different motivations and goals and
aims. I want to go back to the talent
question for a second. And I get the
sense that engineers like open source
and they like contributing to the
research ecosystem on AI. And then I get
the sense that trading firms probably do
not like open source and they're much
more into protecting their proprietary
models or data or whatever. How does a
company like HRT how do you actually
balance that tension?
>> Yeah, I mean this is also like a sort of
really honest answer and that many years
ago this was a relative comparative
disadvantage for us for recruiting. Some
we would often have conversations with
maybe especially PhDs who are graduating
and they would say like well I can go to
Google and I can still publish my
research and that kind of gives me
optionality. People will know who I am.
If I go into an HRT or HR like firm, I
essentially go behind this veil and I
never emerge and people just have to
kind of take it on faith I did smart
things for many years and I would have
basically no strong counter argument
apart from the fact that actually
writing papers is kind of overrated.
I've been there, done that. As when you
get older, you will not care. Now
though, there's this interesting
situation where this golden era maybe of
like being able to be work at a big tech
company, be paid for publishing research
is very much over. the papers that do
come out of the big AI labs are
essentially kind of either very stale or
not important and if you're working on
the most important cutting edge things
you can't share what you're doing and
it's very secretive so in some sense the
problem solved itself a little bit for
me and people now recognize that IP
should be protected I've even seen some
of the sort of AI lab people think out
loud about non-competes in public
thinking tweeting about non-competes and
things which is like an amazing turn of
events because I feel like
>> that was very anothetical Right. I mean,
they're like literally effectively
banned in the state of California. And I
think people were almost like proud of
this fact and would also kind of hold it
against the New York sort of trading
world being like, "Oh, look at these
people with their non-confers."
And a lot of that money is being paid
for talent, but it's also in some sense
paying for intellectual property.
>> Yeah. And like those people know how the
soup is made and they are not writing it
down and not committing any like
explicit sort of IP theft. But if you
hire five people who've been making the
soup,
>> they process knowledge.
>> They know they know a lot of process
knowledge. And you might suddenly feel a
little differently about protecting that
we spend a lot of time training our
employees. Takes a long time for them to
be productive. In some sense, it would
be a shame if people could just take
that knowledge and immediately leave.
And so,
yeah,
>> just going back to the steamroller, I
promised I promised we would when I hear
AI in trading or I know people are very
excited about agentbased AI nowadays.
Part of me thinks back to one of the
more amusing events in financial
history, which is Joe, I'm sure you
remember the time that one of Knight
Capitals ALOS went.
>> Many people would not find that to be an
amusing event at all. the worst
nightmare possible by using from
>> for them
>> the peanut gallery. Yes. Right. Shod and
Freud. So this Algo went rogue and
bought like 7 billion to the whole
company.
>> Yeah. Exactly.
>> What are the guardrails that you put in
place to avoid the destiny of night
capital.
>> So every training cycle we have a talk
about the nightmare with a K and we have
multiple ex the night employees at HRT
as you might expect just from a lineage
of a successful trading firm that ended
in a kind of an unhappy way and we have
many people who are at night.
>> The story is crazy. A successful
training firm that ended in about 15
minutes.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So, it's fair to say that that stuff
haunts us and we try and take as many
lessons away from that as possible.
Defense and layers. So, I think one of
the things that I like to emphasize with
the AI stuff in particular is that it is
not like there's some neural network
directly sending orders to NY. It is in
some sense providing a plan and then
traditional human heavily audited risk
checked layers take the actions and
that's just kind of how it has to be.
And so for us, we are kind of on a on an
operational day-to-day basis, it's just
many many layers of sanity checking
throughout the day. And then at a sort
of high level, it's very careful
process, including processes to
specifically avoid the the KCG type
scenario of how are you even releasing
new versions and what pre-release checks
do you run and audits and we even during
the day we have some I don't know I
guess you call them like sanity checks
of the neural networks to make sure that
they are producing the values that we
expected they would be producing and and
those sort of checking processes are
kind of a little bit behind because they
can't keep up with the like flow but
they were enough to kind of Just again
like every of a numeric stability of the
model sane and things it's not it's not
about losing money or making money in
these are not like oh like risk in the
kind of financial sense it's like
operational risk but paranoia is deep
and that's probably something that's
still very different I think from this
market from the sort of other AI world
which I guess anything goes and like
failure rates are kind of just priced
in.
>> Yeah. But yeah, you could you could
imagine just ruining everything. And I I
guess we worry about losing money, but I
think we worry more about taking action
that a regulator would not want us to do
because if you lose that trust of
regulators, you lose it for a very long
time and we trade in a lot of markets
and we pay very close attention and have
deep respect for the regulators and
their decisions in all those markets.
And this the rules are sometimes very
complex. And man, do we watch that stuff
like a hawk because you don't want to be
kicked out of a country
>> for making an operational error. And
this is a very low tolerance culture
from regulators in terms of making
mistakes. So we stress it a lot and I
think we should because it's it's you
know like the profit you make in 10
years by still being in the game versus
move fast and break things. It's not
move fast and break things, but you
still want to move fast.
>> I have like a million more questions. I
ju but for the sake of time I'll just
ask one more and I don't know even know
whether it's something you're in
position great position to answer about
it's something I actually want to do an
entire episode about at some point but
as you would characterize it what
happens in the second after a jobs
report is released and the what I'm
talking about specifically is numbers
either flash on a screen or a piece of a
text appears on a website and markets
move around a lot all that and there's
people then suddenly unless actually the
jobs report was good and if you actually
look at the wage number and then the
stocks but in that instant in that first
microcond after the release markets are
already moving certainly before any
human has had a chance to read the thing
or form of use so what I assume is that
there's training on here is the text and
here are the things and whatever but to
as you would put it or from the
perspective of HRT what happens in the
millisecond after an event.
>> Yeah. So
>> could be an earnings report.
>> Yeah. I mean, so we have like a
Bloomberg headlines feed that is like
pretty low latency and if it's like a
important article has like a star in the
feed, things like this, right? You can
do everything from having kind of a
handcrafted logic to look for keywords
through to putting it through like an AI
model. One of the things that I like
still can't kind of wrap my head around
is I guess without saying specific
company names, there are options trading
firms that have thousands of people that
are essentially cyborg trading options.
They have maybe 10 people trading like
the options for a single big stock like
Nvidia say
>> and they are humans staring at the feeds
for these things and clicking buttons
and they have user interfaces that are
set up for them to hit the green button
or the red button essentially very fast
>> that job.
>> It's weird. We actually once a monkey on
a computer
>> for a hackathon. We we got a PlayStation
controller and kind of gave people a
chance to try and practice reacting to
events very fast. It's really tough but
it's a learnable skill.
I I think in an efficient market sense
this should be AIable.
>> Yeah,
>> it is challenging though because if you
imagine kind of plumbing it into chat
GBT, it would be too slow. Like the
latency would probably be sufficiently
high. I mean
>> it it's not that fast, right? It's fast
for any normal day-to-day thing, but for
markets it's kind of slow.
>> Also, and this is like a very
interesting research challenge is like
you can't literally use chat GBC to back
test anything. It knows every Jerome Pal
speech and knows what happened
afterwards because it's trained on the
whole internet. So how do you really get
confidence that for the next Federal
Reserve speech it's going to do the
right thing? Traditionally in finance
you back test things to see how it done
in the past.
>> But if in this case it's all kind of in
sample like it's seen it all before
>> and I've seen academic finance papers
where they try and like grapple with
this and they say it still works and
they try and account for this but I know
just this stuff is really that smart.
Yeah, that whole kind of thesis is that
it's memorized everything it's been
trained on. So why would it be reliable?
And so whenever you see someone's being
like, "Oh, I ran every Federal Reserve
speech through J GBT and it got it right
like nine out of 10 times." It's like
>> only nine out of 10 times. Like why not
100%. So I do find that I do think it is
interesting there how many humans are
still involved on relatively high-speed
trading. There are a lot of people still
doing this in in sort of niche products
and it's presumably because it's very
hard to integrate all the information
>> this AGI 20 I don't know 2028 2030 I
don't know there's still a lot of humans
trading stocks and options and so like I
don't know how to reconcile that but I
think about that when I read
>> Ian Dunning that was uh fantastic there
really are like hours more of
conversations are we going to have you
back next week looking forward to next
week's episode but no that was uh great
for me really appreciate Yeah, a
pleasure. Thank you.
[music]
Tracy, I thought that was uh really
great. I like this idea, the sort of
anti-ynicism because you do hear a lot
of people say, "Oh, no, like AI could
solve things like chess or whatever, but
the stock market is fundamentally
different." And I've never been totally
satisfied with some of the theories for
why. And like I get stocks are not like
necessarily like a solvable problem in
quite the same way, but humans make
money on the market by matching
patterns. Why can't smart silicon brains
do the same thing?
>> Well, there's also history now. We have
many years of HFT trading and
algorithmically driven trading where
people have made a lot of money. So, it
seems to be working. The light bulb
moment for me was where Ian talked about
the time frame and the importance of the
time frame. And I think that's really
the key in many ways. It's adapting what
you're doing with AI to the data that's
available. And the data on markets, most
of it is going to be very short term and
more seconds than minutes, more minutes
than days, etc., etc.
And a lot of the data is also biased to
immediacy versus past analysis which he
spoke about as well.
>> It is always funny in finance people
like oh 17 out of 19 times there's been
this death cross of the S&P 500 stocks
went down. It's like any serious data
scientist would spit at that sample.
[laughter] It's like beyond a joke level
to talk about a sample size of 19 as
being all the time. death cross in a
headline is so tempting.
>> That's true. You all you cannot advice
to journalists never pass up a chance to
put a death cross. I was glad to hear I
thought a few things were interesting.
One is I was glad to hear that the
wirelength problem is no longer a thing.
It's not just this race to get closer to
the extreme.
>> That was kind of boring when people were
talking about the cold war and HFT and
all of that.
>> It's interesting that the GPU market is
eased versus where it may have been a
couple years ago. And it's interesting
that even at a scale like a trading shop
that electricity is proving to be a main
constraint which does raise questions
about are we just going to hit up
against a wall given some of the AI
plans that so many people are banking on
for the chat bots.
>> Yeah, I thought also I guess the
cultural shift in some of the labs was
really interesting. this idea that
they've become more proprietary and
perhaps more uh
>> mysterious in some ways rather than the
trading firms becoming more open.
>> Yeah, lots of great conversation. Answer
some questions. Plenty more plenty more
to go.
>> That was helpful. And uh I'm sure we'll
talk to him again. Maybe not next week,
but soonish.
>> Maybe next year.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy. [music]
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. can follow me at
the stalwart. Follow our guest Ian
Dunning. He's Ian Dunning. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman. Dash o Bennett at Dashbot and
Kell Brooks at Kellbrooks. [music]
For more OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
[music] episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
[music] And if you enjoy OddLotss, if
you like it when we dive into how
companies are actually using AI, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a [music] Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple [music] Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
Yeah.
Heat.
[music]